# Species Segmentation

The overall goal is to develop towards a "smart GrowCut" algorithm for interactive segmentation of medical image cohorts based on the concept of competition and cooperation among species of simulated life forms.  It would work in a similar manner to the Grow from seeds effect in the current Segment Editor in 3D Slicer in term of being inspired by living populations competing for space or being mutually supportive, using the analogy that when a human puts down a "positive" paint stroke they are creating a population that is well adapted to a given "environment" defined by the image intesities, while "negative" populations are defined by their corresponding environments.  The new effect would work similarly, except that instead of just operating at the pixel intensity level, any ground truth that is given by the human, to define, say, that one segment is a lymph node and that another segment is an artery, would be used to train a neural network that analyzes a patch around the pixel.  The network would be analogous to the "species" that survives well when similar image conditions promote its growth.  In other parts of the image other segmentation species, such as a liver species or a brain species would out-compete the lymph node or aorta species that learned best to survive in those areas.  This would lay the groundwork for an ecosystem where, for example, the vertebra T3 species would thrive when all the pixels in it "live in a T3 habitat" which can include implicit knowledge that it is adjacent to the T2 and T4 habitats.

I would like to make an interactive "segments as species" tool in 3D Slicer that uses GPU accelerated training to tightly integrate the model training with the segmentation process so that at first we have no species trained.  When I create a segment and start painting positive, i.e. this spot of the ct scan is a lymph node, the species would "spread" to other parts of the scan that had similar environmental conditions to its "home" territory.  At first this could be done using a random seeding function that simulates migration and the seeded regions would only survive if they are very similar to the native territory according to some user-selected threshold.  But instead of relying just on a threshold, the user can also define another "true negative" species that would in this scenario be a generalist species that would be adapted to survive in a variety of habitats and could only be out-competed by the lymph node species where the image-based conditions are very well suited.  I would like these segment species to be represented by neural networks, probably using a U-Net architecture that would be trained using the results of human input and would evolve as humans provide more true positive and true negative input in the image.

For segmentation of new images, the species would be released into the ecosystems defined by other images in a collection of data to be segmented.  The application of these segment species would then used to determine a the segmentation in these other images that they human can examine and evaluate.  In these other images the humans can provide more true positive and negative annotations that will then be used to retrain the species so that they can better learn to survive in ecosystems that better represent the anatomical landscape for which we are training them to inhabit.  Based on the new input data the segment species model would be retrained and then regrown into the scan.

To implement this, the ecosystem simulation system would need to keep track of a map of which species is best adapted to that voxel and a measure of the fitness of that species for that habitat.  As the species evolve their occupation of the voxel is re-simulated based on the adaptations of all the other species collectively.

The interactive definition "seed grow" mode of the algorithm: As a first implementation the algorithm for simulating the ecosystem will follow the GrowCut approach in order to have a well defined iteration that will lead to a deterministic result.  For data that has human ground truth annotations, the system will define those annotations as having 100% fitness.  Then it will perform the same cellular automaton based iteration method where labels spread from cell to cell such that new cells are labeled based on the neighbor with the maximum fittness score and the fitness of the newly labeled cell is determined by the difference in fitness compared to the neighbor.  Because the fitness function is deterministic for a given voxel this iterative process should converge and every voxel cell gets a label. The process is repeated after each paint stroke so that the user can define each of the species defined for the given segmentation task.  The user can also specify if the resulting segmentation is a full annotation, where all voxels are correctly segmented or if some or all segments are only partially annotated, meaning that the segmented regions of that segment should be considered true positive examples but other voxels are not true negatives.

The batch application of trained segment models to new scans "inference" mode: After the segment models are trained using data that is based on cases with known ground truth, new, unlabeled scans can be segmented by doing a first pass where the fitness at all voxels is calculated and each cell is labeled with the maximum fitness.  This same method can be used to implement a full segmentation of a partially annotated scan by applying the currently trained segment model to the otherwise unlabeled parts of the scan and this can be compared to the GrowCut version so that users can be shown where there is a disagreement and can provide additional manual corrections.

A possible future extension of this system will be to have the fitness function accept the current segmentation of it's neighbors as an input, or even take the full patch segmentation as input.  This could allow the overall ecosystem model to evolve much like the game of life, but like the game of life it may evolve dynamically and oscillate in ways that are counterproductive for this application.  As part of future research we can explore the idea of having the segment models and simulations strive for an optimial steady state by introducing weighting terms that discourage oscillation but I don't have a specific plan yet for that.

An important aspect of this approach to segmentation is that the networks implementing the species agents could be of varying complexity and may be useful even if they are very simple and easy to train.  For example, a trivial species could be a thresholding agent, where the model simply adapts to thrive within a range of background intensity values.  Compared to the generalist species, which can survive on any image background, the thresholding species would learn from the training data what range is suitable for it and in those areas it would out-compete the generalist species.  A slightly more sophisticated network would operate like a simple network that can recognize handwriting.  These simple models can be trained in a matter of minutes on a fairly small sample of labled images of written characters.  So there's a good chance that the species agents can have a small number of parameters while still being effective.  Unlike a complex segmentation model that needs to know about all the body parts, these only need to out-compete their neighbors and also to thrive in habitats where they can productively interact with their symbiotic and collaborative other species.  The exact complexity needed in these models is an open research question, and it's possible that very complex models could be developed to perform robustly over large populations and for very detailed segmentation tasks, but it's also possible that useful results could be obtained without a lot of computational investment.

 This concept can also apply to non-human scans, such as microCT scans of things like fish, snakes, and insects.  It is possible that we can train species that are adapted to thrive in environments like brains or eyes and that these common body parts would be part of a very adapted "segmentation species" that out-competes others in analogous parts of "biological species".

 There is another natural extension of this concept in terms of hierarchies of species in specially adapted biomomes that collaboratively survive well when the environment is suitable for their particular adaptations.  In this approach, the segments of something like an eye are not an individual species, but a collection of related species for the different subparts of the structure, like the lens, retina, etc.  And by extension the whole body is collection of environmental niches where certain ecosystems can outcomptete other ecosystems because their constituent species coexist well and thrive togther.  In this way of approaching the image segmentation process the user input is refining the adaptation state of the local biome for each example scan that will collectively define the hierarchy of species in a whole collection of scans.

 Another meta-level adaptation that could take place is the reparameterization of the species-level neural network architectures to adapt their complexity to customize their ability to survice well collectively with the most efficient inference performance.  For example, vertebrae or corneas could be simple to recognize, while lymph nodes may be more varied and subtle.  These networks could then evolve like real biological species do to best fit their ecological niche by surviving best on the available resources.  In this case the architecture of the neural networks defining the species would be like the genetics and epigenetics of a biological species and the computational expense of inference would correspond to the life-sustaining resources like air, water, food, etc.  The images being segmented would be like the terrain and non-organic influences like weather or the passage of time.

 In terms of implementation, the plan would be to have an EcoSeg (Ecological Segmentation) server that is configured to run the training and segmentation aspects of the system.  This server would have compute resources needed to perform the training and simulation aspects and would have a REST-like web api to accept human input coming from something like Slicer or OHIF.  It should be able to dynamically add new species when a user creates a new segment and accept segmentation in the form of ground truth labelmaps to define the species habitat.  It should also be configurable to accept pointers to the datasets to work with, e.g. from the Imaging Data Commons buckets or from MorphoDepot repositories.  Once it's configured it should also act like MONAI Label in the sense that it can prompt the user with images for which it thinks the species simulation may benefit from improved input and show the user the state of the current simulation on that scan. A metric to decide which scans might benefit would be to compare the trained output of the trained segment models to the ground truth of originally provided by the users; that is, apply the inference mode algorithm to the input data to check for mismatched classes - if a different segment model has better fitness than the one corresponding to the one the user specified it would indicate that better input is needed.  Similarly, in inference mode on either training data or new data, if the segment models are applied to a scan and the fitness metrics for the different models the voxels are very close, meaning the distinction of the segments is not crisply defined then these scans can be prioritized as needing more input data.  A map of the per-pair fitness differences could be shown to the user to highlight places where the segment models have similar fitnesses.

 The segmentation ecosystem definitions could be provided directly by the user when they create segments, or they could be pre-populated from existing anatomical taxonomies and known relationships from the academic literature.  Sources like SNOMED, TA2, FMA, and wikipedia contain extensive information about the way these body parts exist and how they related to each other in anatomical and functional hierarchies.

 In the 3D Slicer implementation, the species and ecological zones can be implemented as a hierarchy of overlaping segmentations.  A ecosystem could be described as a combination of the terrain defined by the scan in terms of the image intensities and the shapes of the imaged structures, while the subdivisions of the image would be defined the the collection of segment species that inhabit it.  The simulated solution for any given scan would be the interplay of these two influences as they interact.

 The gamification of the user experience is critical, since a bottleneck in current segmentation is the lack of skilled humans with the incentive and time to perform model training.  Turning this into a game, like "Angry Birds for radiologists" to quote David Clunie when talking about the original Crowds Cure Cancer project, will turn this from an idea into a world-changing success.  A critical aspect of making this have a good feeling for the player would be to never overrule the ground truth supplied by the player.  The system should always try to learn and adapt by treating the user inputs as the definition of the species core DNA.  At the same time, the system should be able to stress-test the player's ground truth and go back to specific inputs and notify the player that specific inputs are "painful" because they force it to be maladptive when trying to be consistent with other inputs provided by the player in the context of the ecosystems where it tries to thrive.  This means we want to prioritize making the training process responsive and the visual feedback needs to be clear and it should feel satifying to participate in training the segment models, almost like they are magically taking what the human is providing and applying multiplying the effect of every paint stroke.

 This same approach could be used to segment other types of imaging data, such as image collections or objects or frames of video.

 ## Implementation and Testing Plan

 I would like to implement the EcoSeg server in python using fastapi and assume that I have a fast server with a gpu and that I can connect to it over localhost ports.  I want the fastapi server to also implement a simple subset of the DICOMweb protocol and a simple static web server that can host a local instance of the OHIF viewer (i.e. it should have the same features as the 3D Slicer WebServer module in this regard - the agent to should look at the Slicer implementation here (https://github.com/Slicer/Slicer/blob/main/Modules/Scripted/WebServer/WebServerLib/DICOMRequestHandler.py) and copy the DICOMweb methods it implements).  It should also have some custom endpoints that allow viewing mosaics of multiple studies to quickly assess model results as segmentations in a web page.  This could be like a contact sheet of axial slices at the centers of detected lymph nodes.  Clicking on one of them should load the corresponding study in Slicer or OHIF depending on the context (if in a qSlicerWebWidget load in Slicer otherwise open in OHIF in a new tab).

 As a test, I want to use the LNQ2023 dataset to emulate the process of human annotation by incrementally adding some of the data piece by piece to simulate a human doing the annotation.  There are 120 fully annotated and the rest of the 513 cases are partially annotated.  First I want to use 20 of the fully annotated scans (the validation scans) to create a first pair of segment species representing the mediastinal lymph nodes and the neutral background species. Since these are fully annotated everything that isn't labeled mediastinal lymph node will be part of the generalist background species.  After training thise species I want to have the system test them on the remaining 100 fully segmented scans and provide a score that I can review on a dashboard.  The candidate segmentations should all be encoded in dicom segmentation objects  (using the newer labelmap version to save space) that correctly embed the references to the source images and also contain the metadata about the generation of species that did the segmentation.  The dicom segmentation objects should use standard terminology and header fields but also include custom coding schemes as needed to fully document how they were generated.  The EcoSeg server can use highdicom to generate these segmentation object and should also generate a structured report that captures the statitical analysis of the generated segmentations as a whole. The structured report should include aggregate and per-scan Dice and NSD scores for the current generation, along with the experiment configuration parameters.

 The LNQ2023 dataset is available on TCIA and on the Imaging Data Commons in DICOM format with segmentations in DICOM SEG and with Series Descriptions indicating if they are fully or partially annotated.  No need to rely on the nrrd files.
 
 I want the dashboard to include statistics about the dice and normalized surface distances like in the LNQ challenge scoring (see https://github.com/LymphNodeQuantification/LNQ2023 for implementation) and I want each of the 100 scans scores to be presented in a scatter plot using the two scoring metrics as the x and y axes.  I want the scatter plot to be interactive in the sense that I can hover over the points and pull up the OHIF viewer in a new tab that loads the scan together with the segmentation that Tagwa did and the current state of the species segmentation. I like Apache e-charts for this dashboard.  It isn't required at first, but I want to use e-charts since in the future I would like to include features like the parallel coordinates visualization of the LNQ2023 data that is linked from the lnqproject.org web site that includes screenshots of the cases in tooltips and also allows users to see other details about the statistics in a single view. 

 I then want to introduce the partially segmented datasets in batches of 20 as additional true positive and true negative input to the species segmentation.  The non-lymph node species would be given  additonal training from each new cohort by treating every voxel that is adjacent to a segmented voxel but not segmented itself as a true negative.  That is the true negative data is the difference between the segmented lymph node and the segment dilated by one voxel.  These are known to be true negatives because if they were true positives the would have been included in the lymph node segment.  In the case of thick scans (> 3mm slice spacing) only the dilations in the higher-resolution in-plane axis should be used, typically in the axial plane.

 In this experiment I would like to be able to observe the convergence of species using the 100 known true positive / true negative scans as the reference.  The hypotheses to test would be:
 * Does initializing the species with 20 fully annotated provide a better than random segmentation of the 100 held out cases.  These would be the same split of data given to challenge participants, with the 20 cases being the validation cases and the remaining 100 case being the ones held back for testing.
 * Does the each introduction of 20 new partially annotated scans improve the score on the 100 held out cases. The last group of 13 scans could be added for completeness but might be ignored for the purposes of some of the statitics and trend analysis.
 * Does the end result using all the partially annotated cases using this approach result in a better overall segmentation model than the participants in the LNQ2023 challenge were able to do using the same data.

 I want to use this experiment as a framework for testing different architectures for the species model.  Initially I want to use a simple model, like a three layer CNN running on 32x32x32 patches of the input data but I want the server to be configurable to explore different architectures and even interact with a metaparameter optimizer using the LNQ experiment as the objective function to maximize performance under a contraint of minimizing compute effort.  Initially each species model is trained with binary cross-entropy to output a fitness score between 0 and 1, where 1 means the patch is a strong match for that species, but this would also be a hyper parameter subject to experimental optimization.

I also want to be able to rerun the experiment by selectively adding more true negative inputs at various points in the evolution of the experiment.  Specifically, I want the system to be able to show the user a time sequence of the evolution of the model as new true positive data is added by providing the final segmentation objects and also a heat map display of the residual probabilities (stored as parametric maps in dicom format) so that the expert annotator can get an intuitive understanding of how the model is responding to the addition of new data.  If the user sees that the lymph node segmentation is out competing the background model for some anatomies it should be possible to inject true negative information at key locations to augment the partially annotated cases and re-run the training using this additional input. At each step of the process a snapshot in the form of a dicom parametric map in a compressed transfer syntax and a dicom seg with labelmap reprsentation and with compression should be stored in a local dicom database.  There's no particular need to store the training weights.

Another experimental direction to explore is the automatic selection of cases where the system detects signs of potentially poorly species models, following the active learning approaches used by MONAI Label.  Metrics for this selection could be a residual uncertainty metric from the segmentation inference steps or class imbalance between lymph node vs. non-lymph node volumes using the known ground truth as the reference standard for determining just how much lymph node there can typically be in a human body.

As a further experiment, I want to be able to watch the evolution of this experiment if I change the initial 20/100 split to different ratios, so 30/90, 40/80 etc up to 110/10 so we can see how the addition of more fully annotated data influences the ability of the ecoseg approach to learn to make accurate segmentations.

These various experimental directions should be made optional and be controlled by explicit experiment design documents in json format.  Each experiment variation parameter should be given a short descriptive name and the experiment design documents should be named by simple combinations of these parameter names but kept short enough for human readability and for use as reasonable filenames and labels for visualizations.

I would like to have the implementation start with a simple configuration to test the basic concept with a minimal amount of code so that it's easy to implement and test in small pieces.  Extra features can then be added on once the core concepts have been vetted.

I want the implementation of the segment models to be cross platform and use well-tested community standard methods, so I want the implementation to be based on pytorch and other well proven libraries.  I like the idea that the models themselves be simple functions that take in a volumetric patch and return a fitness level for that species based on the training weights.  This should make the training and inference steps efficient for implementing the full experimental framework that involves a lot of data that will be analyzed in parallel wherever possible.  I want to have the option to run the experiments in parallel across multiple GPUs or batching species inference on a single GPU, but I want it also to adapt to the hardware it is running on so that smaller scale experiments and demonstrations are possible, but also so that people working on smaller projects, like training segment models to detect something like knee cartilage on knee MRIs could reasonably use EcoSeg on sets of maybe a dozen scans with medium resolution and limited ROIs.